docs: wal kafka rfc (#279)
CeresDB/ceresdb: docs/rfcs/20221007-wal-on-kafka.md

| |+------------------+| |        | |+-----------------+| |                                                               
| +--------------------+ |        | +-------------------+ |                                                               
|                        |        |                       |                                                               
| +--------------------+ |        | +-------------------+ |                                                               
| |      Region        | |        | |       Topic       | |                                                               
| |       ...          | |        | |        ...        | |                                                               
| +--------------------+ |        | +-------------------+ |                                                               
|         ...            |        |          ...          |                                                               
+------------------------+        +-----------------------+                                                               

```
### 1.2 Record Format

> Wal record, we choose the key with detail location information for using such record format in not only the implementation on kafka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We choose to encode the key of WAL record with location details for independence of Kafka.
```

```
Key:
+---------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| namespace(u8) | region_id(u64) |   table_id(u64)   |  sequence_num(u64) | version header(u8) |
+---------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Value:
+--------------------+----------+
| version header(u8) | playload |
+--------------------+----------+
```
### 1.3 Data structure

> The data structure used to record above information is like this (just use to display, thread safe is not considered yet) : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data structure for recording the wal state looks like (here just for display, thread safety is not considered yet) : 
```

```
/// Used to record one table's log state.
struct LogState {
    /// The sequence number of the newest log entry 
    next_sequence_num: SequenceNumber,
    /// The kafka offset in its partition of the newest log entry 
    cur_offset: Option<KafkaOffset>,
    /// The start kafka offset of current log set 
    /// which is still not deleted(due to compaction)
    start_offset: Option<KafkaOffset>,
}

/// All tables in the same shard will be managed by a `Region`.
struct Region {
    ...
    log_states: HashMap<TableId, LogState>,
    ...
}
```
## 2. Main process
### 2.1 Open namespace

> - Fetch all topics and filter them according to the namespace prefix. Cache the results after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fetch all topics and filter them according to the namespace, and cache the results.
```

### 2.2 Open region

> - Search the region in opened namespace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Search the region in the opened namespace. 
```

> - If not found and auto creating is defined,  create corresponding topic in kafka and add it to cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the region not found and auto creating is defined, create the corresponding topic in kafka and add it to cache.
```

> - Return the pointer of `region`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Return the found or created `region`.
```

### 2.3 Write

> - Open the corresponding `region` (define auto creating).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open the corresponding `region` (auto create it if necessary).
```

- Put the log batch to `wal partition`.
- Update `cur_offset` and `next_sequence_number` in memory.
### 2.4 Read
- Open the corresponding `region`.

> - Just read all the logs of the `region`, the split and replay work will be done on the high level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Just read all the logs of the `region`, and the split and replay work will be done by the caller.
```

### 2.5 Delete
Log's deletion can be split to two steps:
+ Mark the delete offset.

> + Do delayed deletion periodically in a cleaner thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Do delayed deletion periodically in a background thread.
```

#### Mark
+ Each table's `cur_sequence_num` and `cur_offset` will be updated in each log writing, and `start_offset` will be updated in its first log writing.

> + When `mark_delete_entries_up_to` is called by a table, it will make `start_offset` None.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ When `mark_delete_entries_up_to` is called on a table, it will make `start_offset` None.
```

BTW, I thought the `sequence_number` passed into `mark_delete_entries_up_to` should be saved. If not,  we wil have no idea of which logs should be cleaned.

#### Delete

> The deletion logic done in a cleaner thread, and it may be a bit complicated. In cleaner's checking, I think logs should be considered to delete in these two situation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deletion logic done in a background thread called `cleaner`, and it may be a bit complicated. In the `cleaner`'s checking, two situations should be taken into cosiderations:
```

- Common cleaning:
  - Scan all `log_states` in region,  check their `start_offset` and get their maximum `cur_offset`(or directly get it from kafka?) .
  - If all the start_offsets are None, it represents that every table is just compacted, we will delete records up to maximum `cur_offset`.
  - Otherwise, we will delete records up to the minimum `start_offset`.
- Too large wal size (while some tables have low update frequency or are never updated for a long time) :

>   - We should get such tables and flush them, and try to clean the wals after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We should get such tables and flush them, and try to clean the wals afterwards.
```

  - But the strategy about this still needs more consideration and discussion, the simplest way to avoid this situation is to flush all tables periodically.

# Drawbacks

> Due to wals of all tables in a region will be written together, the splitting work is needed while replay, which leads to complicated replay and possible lower replay performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to wals of all tables in a region will be written together, the splitting work is needed while replay, which leads to complicated replay and possible poor performance.
```

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, my_awesome_feature)
- Tracking Issue:  https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/issues/280

# Summary
The distributed wal implementation based on kafka.

# Motivation
When using ceresdb of cluster mode, a distributed wal is needed. Although a distributed wal implementation based on oceanbase has existed but the oceanbase cluster is not so easy to build and maintain, I proposal to implement another distributed wal based on kafka.

# Details
## 1. General desgin
### 1.1 Mapping

> + `Shard` (ceresdb) --> `region` (ceresdb):  shardis used to describe a set of tables which will be scheduled by ceresmeta, andregionis used to describe a set of wals which will be written to the same storage unit (for example, a file). Generally, write performance will be not so good If too many storage units are used, so we made such design with reference to Hbase.

Reviewer: It seems some spaces are missing.
